AAAI
Bayes
DARPA
Herbert Simon
Lady Lovelace
Luddite
Marvin Minsky
Singularity
Turing
abductive inference
abductive reasoning
adaptive control
adaptive system
analogical reasoning
artificial intelligence
artificial thinking
assistive technology
automated assistance
automatic translation
autonomous vehicle
brain controlled
brain science
case based reasoning
causal reasoning
cognitive assist
cognitive psychology
cognitive science
computer art
computer assessment
computer grading
computer music
computer vision
computers and humans
computer has been taught
cooperating agents
data mining
decision tree
digital assistant
discourse analysis
emotion in computers
ethical issue
ethical question
expert system
extract meaning
face recognition
fallible human
fraud detection
fuzzy logic
humanoid
humans and machines
humans and computers
human and machine integration
image analysis
image processing
image recognition
image understanding
informatics
intelligent agent
intelligent computers
intelligent robots
intelligent tutoring
language generation
language processing
language understanding
logic and computers
logical reasoning
machine learning
machine translation
machine vision
machines and humans
machines take over
nature of intelligence
neural networks
onboard computer
pattern analysis
pattern recognition
plan the route
planning and scheduling
poker bot
poker program
process information
qualitative reasoning
reading tutor
real time information
recognizing faces
recommendation engine
recommendation system
reinforcement learning
robotic arm
rule based
semantic analysis
semantic search
semantic web
semi autonomous systems
semi autonomous vehicles
simulate human thinking
smart car
smart computer
smart home
smart house
smart machines
smart wheelchair
social impact
social implication
sophisticated sensors
speech recognition
teaching the computer
translation software
translation system
ubiquitous computing
uncertain reasoning
understand language
understand speech
unmanned vehicle
virtual prosthetic
voice action
voice recognition
